README.md, before:

# docxru — Автоперевод CMM/AMM/IPC DOCX → RU с сохранением форматирования

Проект: **параграф/ячейка‑уровневый** перевод авиационной техдокументации (DOCX, часто после PDF→DOCX) на русский
с **инлайн‑защитой** PN/ATA/размеров/ссылок, **строгой валидацией** маркеров и **QA‑отчётом**.

> Важно: `python-docx` **не пересчитывает поля Word** (TOC/PAGEREF).
> Если `mode: com`, pipeline теперь автоматически запускает COM-проход Word:
> обновляет поля/TOC и делает автофит текстбоксов (с уменьшением шрифта до 1-2 шагов при переполнении).

---

## Установка (dev)

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

pip install -U pip
pip install -e ".[dev]"
pre-commit install
```

---

## Быстрый старт

```bash
docxru translate --input source.docx --output target_ru.docx --config config/config.example.yaml
```

## PDF перевод (new)

Установка PDF-зависимостей:

```bash
pip install -e ".[pdf]"
```

Базовый запуск:

```bash
docxru translate-pdf --input source.pdf --output target_ru.pdf --config config/config.example.yaml
```

Дополнительно:

- `--bilingual` -> включает OCG-слой `Russian Translation` (EN+RU переключаемые слои).
- `--ocr-fallback` -> запускает `ocrmypdf` для сканированных страниц.
- `--max-pages N` -> ограничивает перевод первыми `N` страницами.
- `--resume` -> повторно использует TM/progress кэш.

Выходные файлы:
- `target_ru.docx` — переведённый документ
- `qa_report.html` — QA отчёт (ошибки/предупреждения)
- `translation_cache.sqlite` — кэш (translation memory)
- `run.log` — лог

---

## Конфиг

Смотри `config/config.example.yaml` и `config/regex_presets.yaml`.

---

## Архитектура

- `docx_reader.py` — извлечение сегментов (paragraph/table cell)
- `tagging.py` — runs → tagged string с маркерами `⟦S_...⟧...⟦/S_...⟧` и восстановление runs
- `token_shield.py` — инлайн‑плейсхолдеры `⟦PN_1⟧`, `⟦ATA_2⟧`, …
- `tm.py` — SQLite translation memory + progress
- `llm.py` — адаптер LLM (Mock по умолчанию)
- `validator.py` — строгая проверка плейсхолдеров/тегов/чисел
- `qa_report.py` — HTML отчёт

---

## Примечания по качеству перевода

По умолчанию включён `MockLLMClient` (без реального перевода) — чтобы пайплайн и форматирование работали из коробки.
Для боевого перевода подключи реальный LLM провайдер в `llm.py` или реализуй свой адаптер.

---

## Лицензия

MIT

---

## Provider options (new)

- `mock` (default): no real translation, safe dry runs.
- `openai`: real LLM translation via `OPENAI_API_KEY`.
- `google`: free public Google web endpoint (no API key, unofficial/rate-limited).
- `ollama`: local model via `http://localhost:11434` (or `llm.base_url`).

Example provider switch in config:

```yaml
llm:
  provider: google
  source_lang: en
  target_lang: ru
  glossary_path: glossary.md
  timeout_s: 60
```

```yaml
llm:
  provider: ollama
  model: qwen2.5:7b
  base_url: http://localhost:11434
  system_prompt_path: general_prompt.md
  glossary_path: glossary.md
  temperature: 0.1
```

Notes:

- `llm.system_prompt_path` is applied for `openai` and `ollama` providers.
- `llm.glossary_path` is applied for all providers.
- `llm.glossary_in_prompt: false` disables sending full glossary in every request (saves tokens).
- `llm.hard_glossary: true` enables strict placeholder-based term locking.
  Scope is adaptive in pipeline (TOC/table/short labels), but for natural prose keep it `false` unless strict locking is required.
- `llm.reasoning_effort` can tune OpenAI reasoning spend (`none|minimal|low|medium|high|xhigh`).
- `llm.prompt_cache_key` / `llm.prompt_cache_retention` can reduce cost for repeated prompt prefixes in OpenAI calls.
- `checker.openai_batch_enabled: true` enables async overnight checker via OpenAI Batch API
  (keeps normal sync translation path unchanged; checker falls back to sync mode if batch fails).
  CLI shortcut: `--checker-openai-batch`.
- Grouped translation mode is available for `openai` and `ollama`:
  - `llm.batch_segments` (default `1`) controls how many nearby segments are translated in one LLM request.
  - `llm.batch_max_chars` (default `12000`) is a soft per-request payload cap.
  - `llm.auto_model_sizing` (default `false`) auto-tunes grouped batch limits and checker chunk sizes by model context window.
  - CLI overrides: `--batch-segments` and `--batch-max-chars`.
  - If grouped output fails marker validation, the pipeline automatically falls back to single-segment translation for safety.
- Optional translation memory history:
  - `translation_history_path` writes append-only JSONL with source/target/context for successful segments.
  - Use `python scripts/tm_lookup.py --term "your term"` to search prior decisions in `translation_cache.sqlite`.

Reliability and terminology controls:

- Structured output for prompt-based providers:
  - `llm.structured_output_mode: "off" | "auto" | "strict"`
  - CLI: `--structured-output off|auto|strict`
- Glossary prompt scope:
  - `llm.glossary_prompt_mode: "off" | "full" | "matched"`
  - `llm.glossary_match_limit: 24` (used in `matched` mode)
  - CLI: `--glossary-prompt-mode off|full|matched`
- Batch guardrails:
  - `llm.batch_skip_on_brline: true`
  - `llm.batch_max_style_tokens: 16`
  - `llm.context_window_chars: 600` by default (sequential mode with recent EN=>RU context); set `0` to allow grouped batch mode.
  - With `llm.auto_model_sizing: true`, runtime limits are tuned for selected model:
    - translation: `batch_segments`, `batch_max_chars`, `llm.max_output_tokens`
    - checker: `checker.pages_per_chunk`, `checker.fallback_segments_per_chunk`, `checker.max_output_tokens`
- Fuzzy TM hints in prompt context:
  - `tm.fuzzy_enabled`, `tm.fuzzy_top_k`, `tm.fuzzy_min_similarity`, `tm.fuzzy_prompt_max_chars`
  - CLI switch: `--fuzzy-tm`
- Optional ABBYY normalization:
  - `abbyy_profile: "off" | "safe" | "aggressive"`
  - CLI: `--abbyy-profile off|safe|aggressive`
- Optional glossary morphology check (`pymorphy3`, if installed):
  - `glossary_lemma_check: "off" | "warn" | "retry"`
  - In `retry` mode, pipeline performs one additional glossary-focused rewrite when matched terms are missing.
- Optional consistency and layout checks:
  - `layout_check: true|false`
  - `layout_expansion_warn_ratio: 1.5` (warn on high RU/EN expansion ratio)
  - `layout_auto_fix: true|false` (apply optional spacing/font reductions on risky segments)
  - `layout_font_reduction_pt`, `layout_spacing_factor`

New QA/diagnostic issue codes:

- `batch_json_schema_violation`: grouped batch response failed JSON/schema contract.
- `batch_validation_fallback`: grouped output failed marker validation, single-segment fallback used.
- `batch_fallback_single`: grouped request failed, translated segment-by-segment.
- `consistency_term_variation`: same glossary source term observed with multiple RU variants.
- `length_ratio_high`: translated segment expansion ratio exceeds configured threshold.
- `layout_table_overflow_risk`: translated table-cell text likely exceeds available width.
- `layout_textbox_overflow_risk`: translated textbox text likely exceeds available area.
- `layout_auto_fix_applied`: auto-fix (spacing/font reduction) was applied to a segment.

YAML note:

- Enum-like values such as `"off"` should be quoted in YAML. Unquoted `off` may be parsed as boolean `false`.

Safety behavior:

- If translation/marker validation has hard errors, write-back for that segment is skipped and source text is preserved.
- `--resume` now reuses recorded progress + TM entries when source hash matches.

OpenAI "agent translator" profile:

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY=...
docxru translate --input source.docx --output target_ru.docx --config config/config.agent_openai.yaml
```

---

## Быстрый прогон на первых страницах

Для отладки качества и верстки удобно переводить только первые сегменты (примерно первые страницы):

```bash
docxru translate --input source.docx --output target_ru.docx --config config/config.example.yaml --max-segments 120
```

---

## Визуальная проверка страниц (опционально)

Рендер: DOCX -> PDF -> PNG, чтобы глазами сравнить оригинал и перевод.

Установка зависимостей:

```bash
pip install -e ".[render]"
```

Рендер одного файла:

```bash
python scripts/render_docx_pages.py path/to/file.docx --output-dir tmp/docs/pages --backend word
```

Сравнение двух файлов (HTML index):

```bash
python scripts/compare_docx_pages.py --left path/to/original.docx --right path/to/translated.docx --output-dir tmp/docs/compare --backend word
```

---

## LLM checker + dashboard (MVP)

This version adds a second-pass LLM checker and a lightweight local dashboard.

### What checker does

- Checks translation in chunks of `checker.pages_per_chunk` (default: 3 pages, when page numbers are available).
- For DOCX where real page numbers are not available from `python-docx`, it falls back to
  `checker.fallback_segments_per_chunk` (default: 120 segments).
- Uses glossary terms that were actually used in the chunk (`matched_glossary_terms` / rolling glossary context).
- Produces machine-readable edits in `checker_suggestions.json`:
  - `segment_id`
  - `location`
  - `suggested_target` (exact replacement text)
  - `instruction` (what to replace)
  - confidence/severity metadata
- Appends checker findings to existing QA outputs (`qa.jsonl`, `qa_report.html`) as `llm_check_*` issue codes.

### Enable checker

```yaml
checker:
  enabled: true
  pages_per_chunk: 3
  only_on_issue_severities: ["warn", "error"]
  output_path: checker_suggestions.json
  openai_batch_enabled: true
  openai_batch_completion_window: "24h"
```

### Tokens and cost tracking

Configure pricing and enable accounting:

```yaml
pricing:
  enabled: true
  pricing_path: config/pricing.example.yaml
  currency: USD
```

`run_status.json` will include token totals and estimated cost when usage data is available from the provider.

Model/cost reference used for auto-sizing profiles (OpenAI official docs):

- `gpt-4o-mini`: context `128k`, max output `16,384`, price `$0.15 / $0.60` (input/output per 1M tokens)
- `gpt-5-mini`: context `400k`, max output `128k`, price `$0.25 / $2.00`
- `gpt-5.2`: context `400k`, max output `128k`, price `$1.75 / $14.00`
- `gpt-4.1-mini`: context `1,047,576`, max output `32,768`, price `$0.40 / $1.60`
- `gpt-5-nano`: context `400k`, max output `128k`, price `$0.05 / $0.40` (good checker candidate)

### Dashboard files and server

Each run writes:
- `run_status.json`
- `dashboard.html`
- `qa_report.html`
- `qa.jsonl`
- `checker_suggestions.json`

Start local dashboard server:

```bash
docxru dashboard --dir <run_dir> --open-browser
```

Security note: the dashboard server binds to `127.0.0.1` only.

### Studio UI (run from browser)

You can start translations directly from a local web UI:

```bash
docxru studio --base-dir output/studio --open-browser
```

Studio supports:
- source file upload (`.docx` / `.pdf`)
- optional glossary file
- optional system prompt file
- translate provider selection
- translate model dropdown is shown only for `openai` provider
- checker enable/disable + checker provider selection
- checker model dropdown is shown only when checker effective provider is `openai`
- optional OpenAI API key input for the run process

Studio also shows live run status (phase/progress/tokens/cost), log tail, and links to run artifacts.

Commit message:

studio: add grouped aggressive mode, ETA estimate, and batch fallback monitoring

README.md, after:

# docxru — Автоперевод CMM/AMM/IPC DOCX → RU с сохранением форматирования

Проект: **параграф/ячейка‑уровневый** перевод авиационной техдокументации (DOCX, часто после PDF→DOCX) на русский
с **инлайн‑защитой** PN/ATA/размеров/ссылок, **строгой валидацией** маркеров и **QA‑отчётом**.

> Важно: `python-docx` **не пересчитывает поля Word** (TOC/PAGEREF).
> Если `mode: com`, pipeline теперь автоматически запускает COM-проход Word:
> обновляет поля/TOC и делает автофит текстбоксов (с уменьшением шрифта до 1-2 шагов при переполнении).

---

## Установка (dev)

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

pip install -U pip
pip install -e ".[dev]"
pre-commit install
```

---

## Быстрый старт

```bash
docxru translate --input source.docx --output target_ru.docx --config config/config.example.yaml
```

## PDF перевод (new)

Установка PDF-зависимостей:

```bash
pip install -e ".[pdf]"
```

Базовый запуск:

```bash
docxru translate-pdf --input source.pdf --output target_ru.pdf --config config/config.example.yaml
```

Дополнительно:

- `--bilingual` -> включает OCG-слой `Russian Translation` (EN+RU переключаемые слои).
- `--ocr-fallback` -> запускает `ocrmypdf` для сканированных страниц.
- `--max-pages N` -> ограничивает перевод первыми `N` страницами.
- `--resume` -> повторно использует TM/progress кэш.

Выходные файлы:
- `target_ru.docx` — переведённый документ
- `qa_report.html` — QA отчёт (ошибки/предупреждения)
- `translation_cache.sqlite` — кэш (translation memory)
- `run.log` — лог

---

## Конфиг

Смотри `config/config.example.yaml` и `config/regex_presets.yaml`.

---

## Архитектура

- `docx_reader.py` — извлечение сегментов (paragraph/table cell)
- `tagging.py` — runs → tagged string с маркерами `⟦S_...⟧...⟦/S_...⟧` и восстановление runs
- `token_shield.py` — инлайн‑плейсхолдеры `⟦PN_1⟧`, `⟦ATA_2⟧`, …
- `tm.py` — SQLite translation memory + progress
- `llm.py` — адаптер LLM (Mock по умолчанию)
- `validator.py` — строгая проверка плейсхолдеров/тегов/чисел
- `qa_report.py` — HTML отчёт

---

## Примечания по качеству перевода

По умолчанию включён `MockLLMClient` (без реального перевода) — чтобы пайплайн и форматирование работали из коробки.
Для боевого перевода подключи реальный LLM провайдер в `llm.py` или реализуй свой адаптер.

---

## Лицензия

MIT

---

## Provider options (new)

- `mock` (default): no real translation, safe dry runs.
- `openai`: real LLM translation via `OPENAI_API_KEY`.
- `google`: free public Google web endpoint (no API key, unofficial/rate-limited).
- `ollama`: local model via `http://localhost:11434` (or `llm.base_url`).

Example provider switch in config:

```yaml
llm:
  provider: google
  source_lang: en
  target_lang: ru
  glossary_path: glossary.md
  timeout_s: 60
```

```yaml
llm:
  provider: ollama
  model: qwen2.5:7b
  base_url: http://localhost:11434
  system_prompt_path: general_prompt.md
  glossary_path: glossary.md
  temperature: 0.1
```

Notes:

- `llm.system_prompt_path` is applied for `openai` and `ollama` providers.
- `llm.glossary_path` is applied for all providers.
- `llm.glossary_in_prompt: false` disables sending full glossary in every request (saves tokens).
- `llm.hard_glossary: true` enables strict placeholder-based term locking.
  Scope is adaptive in pipeline (TOC/table/short labels), but for natural prose keep it `false` unless strict locking is required.
- `llm.reasoning_effort` can tune OpenAI reasoning spend (`none|minimal|low|medium|high|xhigh`).
- `llm.prompt_cache_key` / `llm.prompt_cache_retention` can reduce cost for repeated prompt prefixes in OpenAI calls.
- `checker.openai_batch_enabled: true` enables async overnight checker via OpenAI Batch API
  (keeps normal sync translation path unchanged; checker falls back to sync mode if batch fails).
  CLI shortcut: `--checker-openai-batch`.
- Grouped translation mode (docxru internal request grouping, not OpenAI Batch API) is available for `openai` and `ollama`:
  - `llm.batch_segments` (default `1`) controls how many nearby segments are translated in one LLM request.
  - `llm.batch_max_chars` (default `12000`) is a soft per-request payload cap.
  - `llm.auto_model_sizing` (default `false`) auto-tunes grouped batch limits and checker chunk sizes by model context window.
  - CLI overrides: `--batch-segments` and `--batch-max-chars`.
  - If grouped output fails marker validation, the pipeline automatically falls back to single-segment translation for safety.
- Optional translation memory history:
  - `translation_history_path` writes append-only JSONL with source/target/context for successful segments.
  - Use `python scripts/tm_lookup.py --term "your term"` to search prior decisions in `translation_cache.sqlite`.

Reliability and terminology controls:

- Structured output for prompt-based providers:
  - `llm.structured_output_mode: "off" | "auto" | "strict"`
  - CLI: `--structured-output off|auto|strict`
- Glossary prompt scope:
  - `llm.glossary_prompt_mode: "off" | "full" | "matched"`
  - `llm.glossary_match_limit: 24` (used in `matched` mode)
  - CLI: `--glossary-prompt-mode off|full|matched`
- Batch guardrails:
  - `llm.batch_skip_on_brline: true`
  - `llm.batch_max_style_tokens: 16`
  - `llm.context_window_chars: 600` by default (sequential mode with recent EN=>RU context); set `0` to allow grouped request mode.
  - `run.batch_fallback_warn_ratio: 0.08` warns when grouped-batch fallback share exceeds threshold.
  - With `llm.auto_model_sizing: true`, runtime limits are tuned for selected model:
    - translation: `batch_segments`, `batch_max_chars`, `llm.max_output_tokens`
    - checker: `checker.pages_per_chunk`, `checker.fallback_segments_per_chunk`, `checker.max_output_tokens`
- Fuzzy TM hints in prompt context:
  - `tm.fuzzy_enabled`, `tm.fuzzy_top_k`, `tm.fuzzy_min_similarity`, `tm.fuzzy_prompt_max_chars`
  - CLI switch: `--fuzzy-tm`
- Optional ABBYY normalization:
  - `abbyy_profile: "off" | "safe" | "aggressive"`
  - CLI: `--abbyy-profile off|safe|aggressive`
- Optional glossary morphology check (`pymorphy3`, if installed):
  - `glossary_lemma_check: "off" | "warn" | "retry"`
  - In `retry` mode, pipeline performs one additional glossary-focused rewrite when matched terms are missing.
- Optional consistency and layout checks:
  - `layout_check: true|false`
  - `layout_expansion_warn_ratio: 1.5` (warn on high RU/EN expansion ratio)
  - `layout_auto_fix: true|false` (apply optional spacing/font reductions on risky segments)
  - `layout_font_reduction_pt`, `layout_spacing_factor`

New QA/diagnostic issue codes:

- `batch_json_schema_violation`: grouped batch response failed JSON/schema contract.
- `batch_validation_fallback`: grouped output failed marker validation, single-segment fallback used.
- `batch_fallback_single`: grouped request failed, translated segment-by-segment.
- `consistency_term_variation`: same glossary source term observed with multiple RU variants.
- `length_ratio_high`: translated segment expansion ratio exceeds configured threshold.
- `layout_table_overflow_risk`: translated table-cell text likely exceeds available width.
- `layout_textbox_overflow_risk`: translated textbox text likely exceeds available area.
- `layout_auto_fix_applied`: auto-fix (spacing/font reduction) was applied to a segment.

YAML note:

- Enum-like values such as `"off"` should be quoted in YAML. Unquoted `off` may be parsed as boolean `false`.

Safety behavior:

- If translation/marker validation has hard errors, write-back for that segment is skipped and source text is preserved.
- `--resume` now reuses recorded progress + TM entries when source hash matches.

OpenAI "agent translator" profile:

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY=...
docxru translate --input source.docx --output target_ru.docx --config config/config.agent_openai.yaml
```

---

## Быстрый прогон на первых страницах

Для отладки качества и верстки удобно переводить только первые сегменты (примерно первые страницы):

```bash
docxru translate --input source.docx --output target_ru.docx --config config/config.example.yaml --max-segments 120
```

---

## Визуальная проверка страниц (опционально)

Рендер: DOCX -> PDF -> PNG, чтобы глазами сравнить оригинал и перевод.

Установка зависимостей:

```bash
pip install -e ".[render]"
```

Рендер одного файла:

```bash
python scripts/render_docx_pages.py path/to/file.docx --output-dir tmp/docs/pages --backend word
```

Сравнение двух файлов (HTML index):

```bash
python scripts/compare_docx_pages.py --left path/to/original.docx --right path/to/translated.docx --output-dir tmp/docs/compare --backend word
```

---

## LLM checker + dashboard (MVP)

This version adds a second-pass LLM checker and a lightweight local dashboard.

### What checker does

- Checks translation in chunks of `checker.pages_per_chunk` (default: 3 pages, when page numbers are available).
- For DOCX where real page numbers are not available from `python-docx`, it falls back to
  `checker.fallback_segments_per_chunk` (default: 120 segments).
- Uses glossary terms that were actually used in the chunk (`matched_glossary_terms` / rolling glossary context).
- Produces machine-readable edits in `checker_suggestions.json`:
  - `segment_id`
  - `location`
  - `suggested_target` (exact replacement text)
  - `instruction` (what to replace)
  - confidence/severity metadata
- Appends checker findings to existing QA outputs (`qa.jsonl`, `qa_report.html`) as `llm_check_*` issue codes.

### Enable checker

```yaml
checker:
  enabled: true
  pages_per_chunk: 3
  only_on_issue_severities: ["warn", "error"]
  output_path: checker_suggestions.json
  openai_batch_enabled: true
  openai_batch_completion_window: "24h"
```

### Tokens and cost tracking

Configure pricing and enable accounting:

```yaml
pricing:
  enabled: true
  pricing_path: config/pricing.example.yaml
  currency: USD
```

`run_status.json` will include token totals and estimated cost when usage data is available from the provider.

Model/cost reference used for auto-sizing profiles (OpenAI official docs):

- `gpt-4o-mini`: context `128k`, max output `16,384`, price `$0.15 / $0.60` (input/output per 1M tokens)
- `gpt-5-mini`: context `400k`, max output `128k`, price `$0.25 / $2.00`
- `gpt-5.2`: context `400k`, max output `128k`, price `$1.75 / $14.00`
- `gpt-4.1-mini`: context `1,047,576`, max output `32,768`, price `$0.40 / $1.60`
- `gpt-5-nano`: context `400k`, max output `128k`, price `$0.05 / $0.40` (good checker candidate)

### Dashboard files and server

Each run writes:
- `run_status.json`
- `dashboard.html`
- `qa_report.html`
- `qa.jsonl`
- `checker_suggestions.json`

Start local dashboard server:

```bash
docxru dashboard --dir <run_dir> --open-browser
```

Security note: the dashboard server binds to `127.0.0.1` only.

### Studio UI (run from browser)

You can start translations directly from a local web UI:

```bash
docxru studio --base-dir output/studio --open-browser
```

Studio supports:
- source file upload (`.docx` / `.pdf`)
- optional glossary file
- optional system prompt file
- translate provider selection
- translate model dropdown is shown only for `openai` provider
- checker enable/disable + checker provider selection
- checker model dropdown is shown only when checker effective provider is `openai`
- optional OpenAI API key input for the run process

Studio also shows live run status (phase/progress/tokens/cost), log tail, and links to run artifacts.
